# SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Matthias Kirschner
#
# SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

<!-- Change Page (Slide 1) -->

Matthias Kirschner
Sandra Brandstätter

ADA & ZANGEMANN

A Tale of Software, Skateboards, and Raspberry Ice Cream

<!-- Change Page (Slide 2) -->

Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Ada. Her family was so 
poor that all their savings fit inside a cookie jar. They didn’t have 
enough money to live in a proper home. Instead, Ada lived with her 
mother and her little brother, Alan, in a cabin near a junkyard on the 
edge of town.

Far away, at the other end of town, lived a famous inventor named 
Zangemann.  He was immensely rich. No sheet of paper in the world was 
big enough to show his bank balance with all its numbers and zeros! He 
lived in a huge house with a swimming pool and waterslide, lots of 
staircases and towers, hundreds of windows, and so many rooms that he 
often got lost in them himself. Zangemann’s mansion stood high on a 
hill. From there, he could look out over the whole city.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 3) -->

Computers had fascinated Zangemann ever since he was a child. When he 
was young, computers were huge machines with lots of cables and loud, 
noisy fans. At school, little Zangemann often dreamed of all the things 
he would do with computers if they were just a little bit smaller — 
small enough that they could be built into other fun things. He knew 
what he would do. First, he would build a computer into his skateboard 
so that it would make cool noises when he rode it — maybe a fire engine 
siren or the sound of a rocket launch. Then he would use a computer to 
invent ice‑cream-making machines! The computer would mix the coolest 
flavors and even sell the ice cream. There would be machines on every 
street corner, and he could get ice cream in his favorite flavor 
whenever he felt like it, and just as much as he wanted. After that, 
he’d build a cleaning robot and a block-sorting machine so that his room 
would always be neat and clean. Zangemann had great new ideas like these 
every day. He could think of nothing else.

As the years went by, Zangemann grew bigger and computers got smaller. 
In fact, by the time he finished school, they were so small they fit in 
his pocket. The smallest ones even fit on his fingertip.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 4) -->

“Finally, I can turn all my ideas into real things!” Zangemann 
exclaimed, and he got right to work. He found ways to put the small 
computers into all kinds of things to make them even more fun and 
useful. And then he sold them.

Adults and children loved his inventions. All the kids wanted to have 
one of his skateboards — complete with the latest sounds to show off to 
their friends at school. Kids also loved his speaker invention, which 
could instantly play any song you requested. And, of course, everyone 
loved the ice cream served every afternoon from the automatic, 
extra-delicious Original Zangemann Ice Cream Machine. It all seemed like 
magic, but the secret was simple: the little computers that Zangemann 
built into his machines made it all possible.

These inventions were very popular at Ada’s school, and many of her 
friends rode around on the cool skateboards. Ada was often sad, since 
her mother couldn’t buy her any of those great things: no skateboard, no 
speakers, no ice cream.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 5) -->

Luckily, Ada lived right next to the junkyard. There were lots of broken 
gadgets and rusty parts, which she put together to make cool new things, 
like a soapbox she and Alan rode roaring down the hill, a windmill, and 
scary junk monsters, which she and Alan would fight together. She also 
found many useful items—an old cell phone, for example. The screen was 
cracked, but she could fix that, and while there wasn’t internet at the 
junkyard, she could get access somewhere else.

Ada had so much fun tinkering in the junkyard and fixing broken things 
that she forgot all about the skateboards and the ice cream.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 6) -->

Because everyone bought his inventions, Zangemann soon became the 
richest person in the whole world. With all his money, he bought a huge 
golden computer with a keyboard made of jewels and set it up in the 
largest room of his mansion. From there, over the internet, he could 
control all the little computers built into his inventions.

All he had to do was press the proper key on the golden computer, and 
immediately all the ice-cream machines in town would dispense only 
vanilla ice cream. If Zangemann wanted people to eat chocolate ice 
cream, he pressed the key for chocolate ice cream. If he gave the order 
for lemon ice cream, the machines made only lemon ice cream. Zangemann 
loved his inventions and was always thrilled at how amazingly well his 
machines worked. Sometimes people were disappointed when their favorite 
flavor wasn’t available, but what could they do? After all, there was 
ice cream on every street corner.

Zangemann had a lot of fun pressing the sparkling keys and watching 
people eat ice cream. He spent many hours every day in front of his 
golden computer doing this. Again and again, he looked down on the city 
through a long telescope, observing how reliably his inventions carried 
out his commands.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 7) -->

When he wasn’t sitting at his golden computer, Zangemann was building 
his little computers into new devices and then selling those. He built 
washing machines that sent a message to your cell phone when your 
laundry was done.  He made vacuums that played happy music instead of 
droning loudly. He invented light bulbs that turned on and off at the 
snap of a finger and cars that told you where the nearest grocery store 
was.
Soon, almost every appliance in the world had a Zangemann computer built 
into it. Not all of his inventions seemed necessary at first, but people 
bought everything he made. That’s just the way it was. Everyone wanted 
the devices made by Zangemann, the greatest inventor in the world.

One day Zangemann thought, “Today I want to see my inventions up close.” 
He put away his big telescope, then climbed down the many stairs of his 
mansion and ventured out into the city, full of anticipation at the 
thought of enjoying his cool devices.

“Maybe a little trip might even give me a few new ideas. If I’m 
completely honest, my last inventions weren’t quite as useful as the 
first ones... ,” Zangemann pondered. “But my ice-cream machines are and 
will remain second to none,” he thought immediately afterward, and not 
without pride, as he passed a group of people all eating coconut ice 
cream, the flavor of the day.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 8) -->

He was completely absorbed in his thoughts when suddenly — BAM! — 
something crashed into his shin.

Zangemann yelped and looked around for the cause. A startled child stood 
in front of him, holding an original Zangemann skateboard under his arm. 
“Sorry, I didn’t mean to do that,” the child stammered, but Zangemann 
wasn’t listening.

An angry Zangemann limped away. Suddenly, he heard loud music. He had 
never before heard something so horrible. He looked around and saw that 
the music was coming from a loudspeaker he himself had constructed. A 
child across the street was holding it. The child seemed to like the 
music, but it gave Zangemann a terrible headache, and his mood worsened. 
This was not how he had imagined his walk!

<!-- Change Page (Slide 9) -->

Zangemann was so furious with the two children. How dare they use his 
inventions this way? That night, he couldn’t sleep, so he sat down at 
his golden computer. From there, he gave all the little computers in the 
skateboards a command that they were no longer allowed to go on 
sidewalks. He ordered the small computers in the speakers to play music 
only at a low volume, except for his favorite music, which he 
immediately turned on to get into a better mood.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 10) -->

The next day, there was a big commotion at Ada’s school. On the way to 
school, the kids’ skateboards had stopped working. The wheels simply 
stood still. And the children could no longer turn up the volume on 
their speakers. What was going on?

Although she didn’t own any of these things, Ada wondered why the 
skateboards and the speakers suddenly stopped working. But she didn’t 
really have time to think much about it, because she was tinkering 
again.  She put together a complete bicycle from the parts of three 
broken bicycles.  She gave the bicycle to her mother as a present so 
that she wouldn’t have to spend her money on bus tickets to work. For 
her brother, Ada built a loudspeaker so he could fall asleep to nice 
stories in the evenings when their mother was still at work.

After a few days, the initial shock at Ada’s school was forgotten. The 
skateboards still didn’t go on the sidewalk, but apart from that, they 
still worked. And so now the children rode in circles around the 
playground and listened to soft music. Only a strange, pompous marching 
music continued to play at an unchanged volume, which the children found 
rather puzzling.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 11) -->

Ada loved Wednesdays. Every Wednesday, her mother and Alan would pick 
her up from school, and they would all go to the library together. Ada 
was always drawn to the technology section. There were books with 
blueprints, instructions for experiments, and explanations of how 
different devices worked. In the library, Ada could also go online with 
her cell phone. She quickly realized that there was also much to 
discover on the internet. There, many people shared their ideas and 
repair tips to help others.

On one of those afternoons, Ada learned two new words: hardware and 
software.  Hardware was a word for something Ada already knew: the 
electronic devices she tinkered with after school, or those devices she 
could hold in her hands and try to fix or make into something else. What 
was completely new to Ada was the word software. She soon learned that 
it meant instructions that ran on a computer to control other devices or 
computers. Some books called those instructions programs or code. With 
such a computer program, one could, for example, tell a loudspeaker 
which song to play and how loud.

The best thing about Ada’s new discovery was realizing that she could 
tinker with software just as she could with hardware. Hardware is built 
with tools — hammers, drills, and screws. Software is built simply by 
writing down the commands for the hardware, one after the other. There 
was a separate language for this — the programming language. With 
software, Ada could make her inventions even more useful. She really 
wanted to learn the programming language!

<!-- Change Page (Slide 12) -->

Over the next few weeks, Ada spent her afternoons in the library. She 
found books and websites that explained how programming languages and 
code worked. For Ada, it felt a bit like learning a secret language, or 
like studying vocabulary in school. Ada ate it all up. She expected her 
first program to do something simple: “Make this lamp blink!”

Of course, she wanted to try her program out right away to see if it 
really worked. At the junkyard, she connected her cell phone to a small 
LED lamp. Then she typed the lines of code into her cell phone.

At first, nothing happened. Ada wondered where the error could be. She 
made a few small changes and tried again and .... “Yeesss!” The little 
light began to flash. On, off, on, off. Ada looked at the LED in 
amazement. She had written her first program!

Ada was totally thrilled. She imagined all the great things she could 
do. If she just entered the right code, she could make her inventions do 
exactly what she wanted. It was not so easy, but after a few weeks, Ada 
wrote a truly useful program: one that would make Alan’s speakers 
automatically turn off half an hour after he had fallen asleep.

Ada also had an idea for the next program she would write. It was a 
bigger deal, a real project. She would probably need the whole summer 
break for it... And she could hardly wait!

<!-- Change Page (Slide 13) -->

Zangemann had slept horribly every night since his terrible walk in the 
city. When he went to bed each night, worries plagued him. “Oh no, my 
marvelous inventions. It can’t be that everyone just plays around with 
them. All the things that could go wrong! I put so much thought into 
everything, down to the last detail.” Zangemann pondered and pondered 
and tossed and turned sleeplessly in his bed all night.

Waking up one morning with a deeply furrowed brow, he made a decision. 
He needed to make a change. Zangemann sat down at his computer and wrote 
one program after another. In these programs, he specified exactly what 
his inventions were to do and were not to do under any circumstances. 
The chaos had to stop!

Once he was done, he sent all the new programs from his golden computer 
to people’s devices. He ordered his speakers to play only his favorite 
music whenever he was within earshot. He programmed the ice-cream 
machines to stop selling ice cream in the afternoon. After all, he 
didn’t want his expensive clothes to get stained by ice cream while he 
was out for a walk. All day long he sat at the computer and typed and 
typed and typed...

<!-- Change Page (Slide 14) -->

Summer break was already halfway over. Ada stood in front of her big 
project and scratched her head. She had built a skateboard from old 
parts and then connected a motor to make the wheels turn. With a 
motorized skateboard, Ada could zoom to the library or the junkyard even 
faster after school. Super practical! But it didn’t work. When she stood 
on it and pressed the Go! button, the wheels moved, but way too fast. 
Ada fell off the skateboard every time she started. No matter what she 
tried, she just couldn’t get it right.

After falling on her bottom for the hundredth time, she went back to the 
library.  She always found answers to her questions there. And indeed, 
on the internet, she came across a program that someone had written for 
an electric scooter that also needed to start slowly. Ada downloaded it 
to her phone.

Back at the junkyard, she adapted some lines of code for her skateboard 
program. She tweaked a few things and kept tinkering.

Several failed attempts later, on the last day of summer break, the time 
had finally come. Ada stood on the skateboard and pressed the Go! 
button, and the skateboard started moving, slowly at first, then faster. 
It worked! She tried to brake. It worked! Ada let out a cry of joy and 
took a trip to the park.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 15) -->

When Ada rode her skateboard to school on the first day back after 
summer break, the other children were amazed. During recess, Ada’s 
curious classmates surrounded her.

“How can you ride your skateboard on the sidewalk?” they asked.

Ada thought for a moment, then said, “I don’t think it’s your 
skateboards but actually the software in them. It’s probably programmed 
into the software that the skateboards aren’t allowed to go on the 
sidewalk. But that can be changed!”

That evening, Ada tested out her theory on her classmate Toni’s 
skateboard.  She worked secretly through most of the night, and the next 
day, Toni could ride on the sidewalk again. Unfortunately, his 
skateboard could no longer make the sounds that his parents had bought 
from Zangemann. Instead, every 10 minutes it made a strange noise that 
sounded like a drawn-out burp.  Ada knew that little errors like that 
could pop up in programs all the time. But Toni’s burping skateboard was 
really quite funny.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 16) -->

More and more children started to visit Ada at the junkyard after 
school, and she helped them rewrite the programs in their skateboards. 
Some of her classmates were very excited about this new discovery. It 
was unbelievable what you could do with software code! They wanted to 
learn everything Ada knew about programming languages, and soon they 
were riding their skateboards again, wherever they wanted to.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 17) -->

But that wasn’t all. With the software, they could give their 
skateboards new, cool features. Marie attached colorful LED lights to 
her board that glowed different colors depending on the speed. Konrad 
built old propellers onto his skateboard for extra speed.

Ada, Toni, Marie, and Konrad spent many afternoons at the junkyard. They 
even set up a real workshop where they could fine-tune their programs 
for hours, listening all the while to music from the speakers Ada had 
built for Alan.

“Your brother’s speakers are much louder than ours,” remarked Toni, who 
was busy attaching a speedometer to his helmet.
“I’m sure that’s also because of the software,” Marie said.

Together, they changed the software for the speakers too. Then they 
turned up the music as loud as possible and danced wildly together.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 18) -->

Every day, Ada and her friends made plans together for the afternoon. 
From a broken ice-cream machine, they built a new one that could make 
ice cream in every imaginable shape and color. They ate square ice 
cream, heart-shaped ice cream, and even pyramid-shaped ice cream, as 
well as strawberry, raspberry, and rainbow ice cream, all with sprinkles 
and hot fudge — much better than the varieties from the Zangemann 
machines.

Sometimes they could even help adults. Toni reprogrammed his father’s 
ironing machine so that it could also iron ties again — Zangemann had 
forbidden the machines to do so because he hated ties like the plague. 
For the bus driver, they built an automatic watering system out of old 
hoses and a computer so that her plants would not die of thirst during 
summer days. And they helped the school custodian modify his vacuum so 
that it automatically recognized toys and wouldn’t suck them up.

Some things they built just for fun, like the fart machine they put in 
their math teacher’s chair. Whenever Ms. Gernet sat down, the machine 
played a little fart sound. The teacher would scold them, but Ada was 
sure that she secretly smirked a little every time.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 19) -->

One day, Zangemann noticed that some computers no longer obeyed his 
programming commands. Shocked and fuming with anger, he called the 
president. In a quivering voice, Zangemann yelled, “Someone is rewriting 
the programs in my devices. That can’t happen; after all, they are my 
inventions. It’s far too dangerous if everyone can do whatever they want 
with the computers. You must make a law against this!”

The president did not want to upset Zangemann. All the government’s 
computers were programmed by Zangemann. Without the computers, the 
government would not be able to run the country. So they passed the law 
as Zangemann requested:

“All computers that do not listen to Zangemann are banned. Anyone who 
reprograms Zangemann’s devices will be fined 500,000 gold pieces!” 
<!-- Change Page (Slide 20) -->

When Ada and her friends heard this, they were furious. “This is 
unfair,” they said. “We rebuilt and reprogrammed our skateboards 
ourselves. They are much better now. We won’t let anyone take that away 
from us!”

They gathered in front of one of their rebuilt ice-cream machines and 
discussed the situation. It was clear that something had to be done 
about the new law, and they made a plan...

<!-- Change Page (Slide 21) -->

The next day, they didn’t go to school. Instead, they rode their 
skateboards to the parliament building, with large protest signs under 
their arms, and sat down in front of the building. The evening before, 
they had put LED lights on some of the signs, which were now flashing 
brightly. They had connected their speakers together so everyone in the 
street could hear what they were saying. Some passersby stopped and 
asked the children what they were demonstrating for.
“For software freedom!” they replied in unison and told the adults their 
story.  Impressed, the adults nodded, and the president also looked 
curiously at their signs as he approached the building.

On the following day, Ada and her friends again sat down in front of the 
parliament building, this time with support. Some classmates came whose 
skateboards Ada had reprogrammed. Toni’s father and other parents and 
adults also wanted to support the protest. They found the children’s 
devices very useful.

With each passing day, more and more children and adults joined the 
protest.  The bus driver they had helped drove up in her bus. She honked 
loudly to attract even more people to the protest. The custodian brought 
a few friends, and Toni’s father brought his colleagues from work, all 
wearing perfectly ironed ties. Even Ms. Gernet came. The crowd grew, and 
after a few weeks, there were protests not just in Ada’s city but also 
in many cities throughout the country.

Ada protested in front of the parliament building every week, even in 
pouring rain. On one such rainy day, when the president passed the group 
of dripping-wet children, he couldn’t help but admire their 
stubbornness. He asked Ada, “Why do you sit here every day? What do you 
want to achieve?” Ada replied, “We want to determine for ourselves what 
we can and cannot do with our computers.” Her friends shouted in unison: 
“Don’t wreck our tech! Don’t wreck our tech!” and “We want the code! We 
want the code!”

The president looked at the determined faces of the children. Honestly, 
he, too, wanted to decide for himself what the government could and 
couldn’t do with its computers. But he didn’t understand anything about 
computers and code, so he had always left that to Zangemann. Deep in 
thought, the president entered the building.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 22) -->

The next day, the president invited Ada and her friends over. “We also 
want to be in charge of our software ourselves. In order for that to be 
true, the government must be independent from Zangemann. Can you tell me 
what you know about computer programs?” he asked them. Enthusiastically, 
they explained to him how software works and what you could do with it. 
The president was amazed.

With this new knowledge, the government would be able to design its own 
software, the way it wanted — completely without Zangemann. Immediately, 
the president called his advisers. In a large group, they discussed with 
the children everything they could change and improve in the software.

That evening, the children went home proud and satisfied. Something 
finally happened! Their long protest was worth it.

The next morning, the president’s phone rang very early. It was 
Zangemann. He was angrier than ever. “Without me, the government 
computers will no longer work,” he threatened. But the president kept 
the call short and quickly hung up. The phone rang many more times that 
day, but Zangemann’s calls went unanswered. The president sat in a 
meeting with Ada, Toni, Marie, Konrad, and the government experts.

In the days that followed, they talked from morning to night and 
designed their first programs for the government’s computers. They were 
no longer disturbed by Zangemann’s calls. Toni had the good idea of 
reprogramming the telephones. When Zangemann called, he only heard an 
automated recording: “The government only wants to use software that it 
can freely use, study, share, and improve. Thank you for calling.”

<!-- Change Page (Slide 23) -->

Then, after many weeks of protests and discussions, the time had finally 
come: they abolished the old Zangemann law! Instead, the government 
announced:

“Everyone is allowed to program their own computers as long as they 
adhere to the other laws.”

In addition, a new school subject was introduced: computer hardware and 
software.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 24) -->

That evening, everyone celebrated with a big party. Ada, Alan, Toni, 
Marie, Konrad, and other children from school and their parents; the 
president; Ms. Gernet; the bus driver; the custodian — they were all 
there. They decorated the streets, listened to loud music, and ate ice 
cream, as much as they wanted, and in every imaginable shape and color.

While the others continued partying late into the night, Ada and her 
friends slipped away to their workshop. They already had a lot of ideas 
for new inventions. And they wanted to start right away.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 25) -->

And Zangemann? No one’s heard much from him. Maybe he’s still sitting 
angrily in front of his golden computer. Maybe he doesn’t dare go out 
into the street anymore and has boarded up all the windows of his 
mansion so that he doesn’t have to worry about what other people are 
doing with his inventions. But maybe he also sometimes looks out into 
the world through his telescope and sees what the children are inventing 
every day. Perhaps then he will remember how much fun it was for himself 
to tinker and experiment. And maybe, just maybe, he eats pyramid-shaped 
raspberry ice cream with rainbow sprinkles.

<!-- Change Page (Slide 26) -->

